[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist and author specializing in
the treatment of pathological narcissism
and related issues and just a quick
content warning
today's episode deals with the difficult
topic of suicide
feel free to circle back to this one
another time if you're feeling sensitive
to that topic right now
so
i also post my podcast on youtube and
one listener requested that i discuss
the idea of a false self
and i think that's a fantastic
suggestion
i think the false self is really central
to narcissistic pathology individuals
with npd have a lot in common with
individuals who have borderline
personality disorder
the underlying personality structure and
vulnerabilities are often very similar
but i think one of the main differences
if not the main difference is that
narcissists have developed a false self
that hides those vulnerabilities
so what is a false self
well the psychoanalyst and pediatrician
donald winicott coined the term to
describe a particularly painful form of
disconnect from authentic feelings that
he saw in the children that he treated
these children were discouraged from
feeling or expressing their true
emotions by caregivers who exerted a
kind of pervasive pressure on them to
adapt to the caregiver's needs
instead of the other way around
you know
in some ways parents are supposed to
adapt to their children they're supposed
to set their own needs aside to
prioritize the child's emotional growth
and development
monica noticed that some parents were
incapable of doing this
that instead of seeing the world from
their child's perspective they withheld
love warmth and affection unless the
child saw the world from the parents
perspective
and i've had memory that i'd like to
share
one that i think illustrates this
dynamic
i can vividly recall going to the public
swimming pool with my mom when i was
about 7 or 8 years old this pool had a
high dive and my mom was afraid of
heights
she wanted me to go off the high dive
and i happily agreed i wanted to impress
her to show her how brave i was
so i started up the ladder but very
quickly i discovered that i too was
afraid of heights and i froze
eventually i climbed back down
only to be met with what i think is the
coldest reception that i'd ever felt
she was furious
she demanded that i march my butt right
back over to the high dive and that i
jump off
and i tried
i tried again and again and again the
whole afternoon became about her
insistence that i jump off the high dive
that i do something that she herself was
too afraid to do
she didn't seem to grasp the hypocrisy
i could feel that she just couldn't
tolerate my fear and the message that i
i received
loud and clear was that this version of
me was not lovable to her
i can remember feeling so alone i had no
ally
the other kids were impatient because i
kept climbing up and down the ladder and
the lifeguard kept telling me to just
jump already
and my mom
was treating me like a nuisance someone
who wasn't hers
whenever i'd go back and beg her to just
let me swim in the regular pool
now funny enough i can't actually recall
whether or not i finally jumped
i think i might have but then again i
can also sort of remember feeling
defeated and ashamed on the way home
so maybe i didn't
but i don't think it matters whether or
not i jumped
the lesson that i learned that day was
that i needed to be a certain version of
a little boy
to find love and warmth and acceptance
there was no you know hey kiddo it's
okay you're just afraid i'm afraid too
let's go get some ice cream or don't
worry about it we'll deal with it
another time there was no comfort there
was no refuge only pressure
when these sorts of experiences
predominate in a person's life
it encourages the development of a
protective false self
essentially the child learns that only a
specific version of the self is lovable
the parts of the self that are afraid
hurt or emotionally needy or
inconvenient for the parent
must be driven underground in order to
win
being loved and accepted
and psychoanalyst and author alice
miller wrote about this extensively in
her essay titled depression and
grandiosity as related forms of
narcissistic disturbances she writes the
childhood trauma is repeated
the child is always the child his mother
admires but at the same time he senses
that so long as it's his qualities which
are being admired he's not really loved
for the person he is at any given time
dangerously close to pride in the child
shame is concealed lest he should fail
to fulfill the expectations
miller discusses the transient
hollow quality of what she calls the
metal of the false self
the false self is developed to
win the parents love and acceptance but
it's a tin medal at best because the
love that's won isn't real
it's forever contingent on the child's
continued performance of the qualities
that the parent admires
otto kernberg also points to the common
histories among narcissistic patients
of callous or cold treatment at the
hands of their parents
combined with over-valuation of the
child for one or more favored qualities
winnicott 2 discusses a similar theme he
notes that the the parent
substitutes the child's spontaneous
gesture for that of the parent
and this was the basis for winnicott's
theories concerning the false self
he perceived this sort of parental
intrusion on the infant's spontaneous
reverie to be a form of relational
trauma that over time
cuts the developing child off from
connection to their emotional
authenticity
he described what he considers to be the
ideal parent infant dyad in which the
caregiver actively facilitates something
that he called going on being the child
must first learn to connect completely
with the feelings and sensations that
arise from within
um children who are prevented or
discouraged from connecting to that
authentic wellspring of joy and vitality
and pain and sorrow
that's inside of them end up living a
dead-end existence
one in which they struggle continuously
to find anything in life that feels like
it's real
like it's theirs
he called this the false self
and he viewed it as a tragedy
a way of being in the world filled with
the pain of inauthentic living
the person strives over and over to be a
version of the self that will quote
merit love only to find that they never
actually feel loved they try to be
beautiful or shiny or perfect or
impressive
only to always feel essentially
invisible and hungry for the experience
of going on being that they were denied
stephen johnson is a contemporary
psychologist and author he wrote a
fantastic book called humanizing the
narcissistic style
and echoing winnicott and kernberg and
miller johnson describes narcissistic
injury as the caregivers need for the
individual to be something other than
who or what he or she really is
he writes that the child
dependent and vulnerable
will then deny his real self in order to
hold on to the mother
living up to her idealized expectations
and ministering to her narcissistic
needs the child denies and loses
his authentic self
he invests in the idealized false self
trying through it to regain what he lost
which is the love and respect echoing
and mirroring which were required for
him to discover accept and love his true
self in the first place
much of this literature unfairly focuses
on mothers
and when i teach these concepts i make
it a point to say that we aren't
specifically talking about mothers here
we're talking about caregivers and that
can include grandfathers or uncles aunts
fathers older siblings adoptive parents
and also mothers
the point isn't so much who encouraged
the development of a protective false
self
but rather that someone did and that
that set in motion a lifelong battle
between shame and grandiosity
so when working with these issues in
treatment the narcissistic patient must
eventually realize that healing involves
grieving a life not lived
they've existed as a false self
an attempt to be someone they are not
in some ways they may not have ever
really lived at all in a famous essay
winnicott discusses a patient who he
sadly could not save
he wonders if this patient
who tragically killed herself
he wonders if this patient was trying to
express in the therapy
a psychological reality that in some way
she had already died
that in fact she died in early infancy
he writes that he understood only too
late that this patient lived with the
emotional reality that she had in fact
been killed emotionally as a baby
grieving the loss of the true self can
be so painful
that many people spend their lives
laboring under the demands of a
protective false self
convinced that the final act of
excellence or superiority is right
around the corner and that they'll
finally be able to feel like a real
lovable person
now ironically
the only way to find that authenticity
is through grief
when someone has lived their life as a
false self
reconnecting with their authenticity
means finding what's real inside
and often
grief is the one emotion that can most
connect them to that child who was lost
or buried or killed
so many years before
now when i share winnicott's story with
students
they often don't really know what to
make of it
how could it be helpful to a patient to
tell them that in some crucial way
they've already died
but eventually
the students realize that we must follow
where the patient leads
and often with narcissistic patients
that is toward the terrible realization
that they too somehow
in an important way
died as a baby
and by that i mean they never really
lived
they were cut off from their own self
their own feelings forced to substitute
a falsehood for the truth
to play a role
instead of experiencing love
and this early death
must be acknowledged before it can be
grieved
and it must be grieved
before they can begin to live
now if you recognize your own experience
and what i'm saying here today please
know that it is possible to heal
it's possible to do this work
and to resuscitate that part of you
that got lost or abandoned or maybe even
killed
so long ago
we can't go back in time
we can't undo the past
the only path is forward but as long as
you're breathing
there's always a chance to begin to live
and also none of this is easy
so find a therapist who can walk this
difficult path with you
who can see the protective false self
for what it actually is
and that's a child's attempt
to be good enough
to deserve love
okay
well until next time take good care
[Music]
you